README.md, before:

# enterprise_web_dev_TKV

## team name: Sprint Zero


### Project description

This project is an enterprise-level full-stack application designed to process, analyze, and visualize Mobile Money (MoMo) transaction data. The system automates the transition of unstructured financial data from raw XML SMS exports into a structured, relational format for meaningful business intelligence.

### Project structure 

```
├── README.md                 # Project overview, setup, and links
├── .env              # Template for environment variables
├── requirements.txt          # Python dependencies (lxml, dateutil, etc.)
├── index.html                # Main Dashboard entry point
├── web/
│   ├── styles.css            # Dashboard styling
│   ├── chart_handler.js      # Logic for fetching and rendering charts
│   └── assets/               # Images, icons, and diagrams
├── data/
│   ├── raw/                  # Raw MoMo XML input (Git-ignored)
│   ├── processed/            # Cleaned JSON outputs for the frontend
│   ├── db.sqlite3            # SQLite Database file
│   └── logs/
│       ├── etl.log           # Logs for the ETL process
│       └── dead_letter/      # Storage for unparsed/invalid XML snippets
├── etl/
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── config.py             # File paths and configuration thresholds
│   ├── parse_xml.py          # XML parsing logic
│   ├── clean_normalize.py    # Data cleaning (dates, amounts, phones)
│   ├── categorize.py         # Transaction type classification logic
│   ├── load_db.py            # Database schema and upload logic
│   └── run.py                # Main CLI to execute the full pipeline
├── api/                      # Optional: API layer for data access
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── app.py                # FastAPI/Flask entry point
│   └── schemas.py            # Data models
├── scripts/
│   ├── run_etl.sh            # Script to run the ETL pipeline
│   ├── export_json.sh        # Script to rebuild processed JSON
│   └── serve_frontend.sh     # Script to launch local web server
└── tests/
    ├── test_parse_xml.py     # Unit tests for parsing
    ├── test_clean_normalize.py
    └── test_categorize.py
```

## High-Level System Architecture

**Link:** [System architecture](https://docs.google.com/document/d/11Mo64WVRFxF-ntBpAhk93I35mZiF2ezVPgK3KJmt91s/edit?usp=sharing)

To handle the complexity of MoMo transaction data, we have designed a modular pipeline that moves data from raw SMS exports to a polished user dashboard. Here is how the pieces fit together:

**1. Data Ingestion**

The process starts with our raw data source, a MoMo XML file. This contains the original transaction logs that need to be parsed and structured.

**2. The ETL Pipeline (The Engine)**

This is where the heavy lifting happens. We have broken the processing logic into three distinct steps to keep the code maintainable:

    Parsing: parse_xml.py reads the XML structure and extracts the raw message strings.
    
    Cleaning: clean_normalize.py handles the "messy" parts of the data, like standardizing phone numbers, fixing date formats, and ensuring currency amounts are treated as numbers.
    
    Categorizing: categorize.py uses pattern-matching to identify exactly what happened in each transaction—whether it was a peer-to-peer transfer, a withdrawal, or an airtime purchase.

**3. Data Storage & Loading**

Once the data is refined, load_db.py distributes it to three essential locations:

    SQLite Database: Our relational storage for long-term data integrity (db.sqlite3).
    
    JSON Feed: A processed dashboard.json file designed for quick loading by the frontend.
    
    System Logs: An etl.log file to help us track the pipeline's health and troubleshoot any errors.

**4. The Visualization Layer**

The user interacts with a web dashboard (index.html). Using chart_handler.js, the dashboard fetches the processed JSON data and turns it into interactive charts and a searchable transaction table.

**5. Scalability (Bonus API)**

We have also included a REST endpoint in our architecture. This provides a professional gateway to query the database, making the system ready for future expansions or mobile app integration.

## Scrum Board

Our team is using **Trello** for Agile task management and sprint planning.

**Board URL:** [MoMo Dashboard Scrum Board](https://trello.com/invite/b/69624a1558e6a5d62412b76c/ATTIa8c83bd9bb092c937a5cac581aae0704AC5A5E80/momo-dashboard-scrum-board)

**Board Structure:**
- **To Do**: Backlog of upcoming tasks (3 initial tasks added)
- **In Progress**: Currently active work items
- **Done**: Completed tasks

**Initial Tasks:**
1. Set up team GitHub repository
2. Create system architecture diagram
3. Research XML parsing libraries

**Database Setup**
## Database Setup (Week 2 Assignment)

### Overview
MySQL database for MoMo SMS transaction processing with support for multiple user types, transaction categories, and comprehensive audit logging.

### Prerequisites
- MySQL 8.0 or higher installed
- MySQL Workbench (recommended for running scripts)

### Quick Setup

**Using MySQL Workbench:**
1. Open MySQL Workbench
2. Connect to Local instance (password: `michealkong24@x`)
3. File → Open SQL Script → Select `database_setup.sql`
4. Click ⚡ Execute
5. Refresh schemas to see `momo_sms_db`

**Verify Installation:**
```sql
USE momo_sms_db;
SHOW TABLES;
```

### Database Structure

**Tables:**
- `users` - MoMo account holders (5 sample records)
  - Supports PERSON, MERCHANT, BANK, SYSTEM account types
  - Indexed on phone_number, account_code, user_type
  
- `transaction_categories` - Transaction types (5 sample records)
  - Money Transfer, Airtime, Bill Payment, Merchant Payment, Cash Withdrawal
  - Indexed on category_code
  
- `transactions` - Main transaction records (5 sample records)
  - Stores amount, currency, fee, status, reference codes
  - Indexed on category_id, transaction_date, status, currency
  
- `transaction_parties` - User-Transaction junction table (10 sample records)
  - Resolves M:N relationship between users and transactions
  - Tracks SENDER and RECEIVER roles
  - Indexed on transaction_id, user_id, role
  
- `system_logs` - System audit logs (5 sample records)
  - Tracks all system operations and errors
  - Indexed on log_date, log_level, user_id, transaction_id

### Key Features

✅ **Foreign Key Constraints** - Referential integrity across all tables
- transactions → transaction_categories
- transaction_parties → transactions, users
- system_logs → users, transactions

✅ **CHECK Constraints** - Data validation rules
- Phone numbers must start with '+'
- Transaction amounts must be positive
- Fees must be non-negative
- Log levels must be INFO/WARNING/ERROR/CRITICAL

✅ **15 Performance Indexes** - Optimized for common queries
- All foreign keys indexed
- Frequently searched columns indexed (phone, dates, status)

✅ **Column Comments** - Self-documenting schema
- Every column has descriptive comments

✅ **M:N Relationship** - Junction table pattern
- Users and Transactions linked via transaction_parties table
- Supports multiple participants per transaction

### Sample Queries

**View all users:**
```sql
SELECT * FROM users;
```

**Transactions with categories (JOIN):**
```sql
SELECT t.transaction_id, t.amount, tc.name AS category, t.status
FROM transactions t
JOIN transaction_categories tc ON t.category_id = tc.category_id;
```

**User transaction history (M:N relationship):**
```sql
SELECT tp.transaction_id, u.name AS user_name, tp.role, t.amount
FROM transaction_parties tp
JOIN users u ON tp.user_id = u.user_id
JOIN transactions t ON tp.transaction_id = t.transaction_id
ORDER BY tp.transaction_id;
```

### Assignment Files

- `database_setup.sql` - Complete database setup script with DDL and sample data
- `json_schemas.json` - JSON representations of database entities for API design
- `screenshots/` - Query results demonstrating CRUD operations and constraints
  - 01_tables.png - Database tables
  - 02_users.png - User records
  - 03_transactions_join.png - JOIN query results
  - 04_many_to_many.png - M:N relationship demonstration
  - 05_update.png - UPDATE operation
  - 06_constraints.png - Database constraints
  - 07_indexes.png - Performance indexes


#### Team members

Bendou Janna Vitalina Soeur

Kamy Uwambaye

Tumba II Zikoranachukwudi M Kongolo

Commit message:

Add JSON data modeling section to README
Added JSON schemas for MoMo transaction API responses, including complete transaction examples, SQL-to-JSON mapping documentation, and example files for database entities.

README.md, after:

# enterprise_web_dev_TKV

## team name: Sprint Zero


### Project description

This project is an enterprise-level full-stack application designed to process, analyze, and visualize Mobile Money (MoMo) transaction data. The system automates the transition of unstructured financial data from raw XML SMS exports into a structured, relational format for meaningful business intelligence.

### Project structure 

```
├── README.md                 # Project overview, setup, and links
├── .env              # Template for environment variables
├── requirements.txt          # Python dependencies (lxml, dateutil, etc.)
├── index.html                # Main Dashboard entry point
├── web/
│   ├── styles.css            # Dashboard styling
│   ├── chart_handler.js      # Logic for fetching and rendering charts
│   └── assets/               # Images, icons, and diagrams
├── data/
│   ├── raw/                  # Raw MoMo XML input (Git-ignored)
│   ├── processed/            # Cleaned JSON outputs for the frontend
│   ├── db.sqlite3            # SQLite Database file
│   └── logs/
│       ├── etl.log           # Logs for the ETL process
│       └── dead_letter/      # Storage for unparsed/invalid XML snippets
├── etl/
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── config.py             # File paths and configuration thresholds
│   ├── parse_xml.py          # XML parsing logic
│   ├── clean_normalize.py    # Data cleaning (dates, amounts, phones)
│   ├── categorize.py         # Transaction type classification logic
│   ├── load_db.py            # Database schema and upload logic
│   └── run.py                # Main CLI to execute the full pipeline
├── api/                      # Optional: API layer for data access
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── app.py                # FastAPI/Flask entry point
│   └── schemas.py            # Data models
├── scripts/
│   ├── run_etl.sh            # Script to run the ETL pipeline
│   ├── export_json.sh        # Script to rebuild processed JSON
│   └── serve_frontend.sh     # Script to launch local web server
└── tests/
    ├── test_parse_xml.py     # Unit tests for parsing
    ├── test_clean_normalize.py
    └── test_categorize.py
```

## High-Level System Architecture

**Link:** [System architecture](https://docs.google.com/document/d/11Mo64WVRFxF-ntBpAhk93I35mZiF2ezVPgK3KJmt91s/edit?usp=sharing)

To handle the complexity of MoMo transaction data, we have designed a modular pipeline that moves data from raw SMS exports to a polished user dashboard. Here is how the pieces fit together:

**1. Data Ingestion**

The process starts with our raw data source, a MoMo XML file. This contains the original transaction logs that need to be parsed and structured.

**2. The ETL Pipeline (The Engine)**

This is where the heavy lifting happens. We have broken the processing logic into three distinct steps to keep the code maintainable:

    Parsing: parse_xml.py reads the XML structure and extracts the raw message strings.
    
    Cleaning: clean_normalize.py handles the "messy" parts of the data, like standardizing phone numbers, fixing date formats, and ensuring currency amounts are treated as numbers.
    
    Categorizing: categorize.py uses pattern-matching to identify exactly what happened in each transaction—whether it was a peer-to-peer transfer, a withdrawal, or an airtime purchase.

**3. Data Storage & Loading**

Once the data is refined, load_db.py distributes it to three essential locations:

    SQLite Database: Our relational storage for long-term data integrity (db.sqlite3).
    
    JSON Feed: A processed dashboard.json file designed for quick loading by the frontend.
    
    System Logs: An etl.log file to help us track the pipeline's health and troubleshoot any errors.

**4. The Visualization Layer**

The user interacts with a web dashboard (index.html). Using chart_handler.js, the dashboard fetches the processed JSON data and turns it into interactive charts and a searchable transaction table.

**5. Scalability (Bonus API)**

We have also included a REST endpoint in our architecture. This provides a professional gateway to query the database, making the system ready for future expansions or mobile app integration.

## Scrum Board

Our team is using **Trello** for Agile task management and sprint planning.

**Board URL:** [MoMo Dashboard Scrum Board](https://trello.com/invite/b/69624a1558e6a5d62412b76c/ATTIa8c83bd9bb092c937a5cac581aae0704AC5A5E80/momo-dashboard-scrum-board)

**Board Structure:**
- **To Do**: Backlog of upcoming tasks (3 initial tasks added)
- **In Progress**: Currently active work items
- **Done**: Completed tasks

**Initial Tasks:**
1. Set up team GitHub repository
2. Create system architecture diagram
3. Research XML parsing libraries

**Database Setup**
## Database Setup (Week 2 Assignment)

### Overview
MySQL database for MoMo SMS transaction processing with support for multiple user types, transaction categories, and comprehensive audit logging.

### Prerequisites
- MySQL 8.0 or higher installed
- MySQL Workbench (recommended for running scripts)

### Quick Setup

**Using MySQL Workbench:**
1. Open MySQL Workbench
2. Connect to Local instance (password: `michealkong24@x`)
3. File → Open SQL Script → Select `database_setup.sql`
4. Click ⚡ Execute
5. Refresh schemas to see `momo_sms_db`

**Verify Installation:**
```sql
USE momo_sms_db;
SHOW TABLES;
```

### Database Structure

**Tables:**
- `users` - MoMo account holders (5 sample records)
  - Supports PERSON, MERCHANT, BANK, SYSTEM account types
  - Indexed on phone_number, account_code, user_type
  
- `transaction_categories` - Transaction types (5 sample records)
  - Money Transfer, Airtime, Bill Payment, Merchant Payment, Cash Withdrawal
  - Indexed on category_code
  
- `transactions` - Main transaction records (5 sample records)
  - Stores amount, currency, fee, status, reference codes
  - Indexed on category_id, transaction_date, status, currency
  
- `transaction_parties` - User-Transaction junction table (10 sample records)
  - Resolves M:N relationship between users and transactions
  - Tracks SENDER and RECEIVER roles
  - Indexed on transaction_id, user_id, role
  
- `system_logs` - System audit logs (5 sample records)
  - Tracks all system operations and errors
  - Indexed on log_date, log_level, user_id, transaction_id

### Key Features

✅ **Foreign Key Constraints** - Referential integrity across all tables
- transactions → transaction_categories
- transaction_parties → transactions, users
- system_logs → users, transactions

✅ **CHECK Constraints** - Data validation rules
- Phone numbers must start with '+'
- Transaction amounts must be positive
- Fees must be non-negative
- Log levels must be INFO/WARNING/ERROR/CRITICAL

✅ **15 Performance Indexes** - Optimized for common queries
- All foreign keys indexed
- Frequently searched columns indexed (phone, dates, status)

✅ **Column Comments** - Self-documenting schema
- Every column has descriptive comments

✅ **M:N Relationship** - Junction table pattern
- Users and Transactions linked via transaction_parties table
- Supports multiple participants per transaction

### Sample Queries

**View all users:**
```sql
SELECT * FROM users;
```

**Transactions with categories (JOIN):**
```sql
SELECT t.transaction_id, t.amount, tc.name AS category, t.status
FROM transactions t
JOIN transaction_categories tc ON t.category_id = tc.category_id;
```

**User transaction history (M:N relationship):**
```sql
SELECT tp.transaction_id, u.name AS user_name, tp.role, t.amount
FROM transaction_parties tp
JOIN users u ON tp.user_id = u.user_id
JOIN transactions t ON tp.transaction_id = t.transaction_id
ORDER BY tp.transaction_id;
```

### Assignment Files

- `database_setup.sql` - Complete database setup script with DDL and sample data
- `json_schemas.json` - JSON representations of database entities for API design
- `screenshots/` - Query results demonstrating CRUD operations and constraints
  - 01_tables.png - Database tables
  - 02_users.png - User records
  - 03_transactions_join.png - JOIN query results
  - 04_many_to_many.png - M:N relationship demonstration
  - 05_update.png - UPDATE operation
  - 06_constraints.png - Database constraints
  - 07_indexes.png - Performance indexes

### JSON Data Modeling 

Added JSON schemas for MoMo transaction API responses in `/data/json_models/`:
- Complete transaction examples with nested relationships
- SQL-to-JSON mapping documentation
- 6 JSON example files for all database entities


#### Team members

Bendou Janna Vitalina Soeur

Kamy Uwambaye

Tumba II Zikoranachukwudi M Kongolo
